Time Ranges: getting nicely ahead of ourselves (#166)
andycroll/andycroll.com: _posts/2022/2022-10-03-date-and-time-extensions-are-an-unsung-hero-of-active-support.md

---
title: "Time extensions are an unsung hero of Active Support"
description: "There’s a method for that"
layout: article
category: ruby
image:
  base: "2022/time-ranges-are-an-unsung-hero-of-active-support"
  alt: "Calendar with pins"
  credit: "Towfiqu barbhuiya"
  source: "https://unsplash.com/photos/bwOAixLG0uc"

---

In Active Support‘s extensions to the core Ruby classes, some of the most useful and plentiful are related to `Time`.

> One of Rails’ founding uses was to provide helpful methods to provide reusable methods for regularly performed tasks. In our web applications we‘re often using time periods.

Reviewer: *Rails's

(apostrophe 's' for singulars!)

Reviewer: Repetition of "to provide" here feels a little clunky.

Author: ```suggestion
One of Rails’s founding uses was to provide helpful, reusable methods for regularly performed tasks. In our web applications we‘re often using time periods.
```

> Enter the methods from [DateAndTime::Calculations](https://github.com/rails/rails/blob/main/activesupport/lib/active_support/core_ext/date_and_time/calculations.rb), or see the [API documentation](http://api.rubyonrails.org/classes/DateAndTime/Calculations.html) or the [`DateTime` section in the Core Extensions Rails guide](http://guides.rubyonrails.org/active_support_core_extensions.html#extensions-to-datetime).

Reviewer: Not sure about the "or see" structure here. Maybe: "Enter the methods....! And then separately something along the lines of: to find out more, check out the API docs.. but maybe that "Api docs" link should come later down. Haven't finished reading yet.

today.all_month
#=> Sat, 01 Oct 2022..Mon, 31 Oct 2022
today.all_year
#=> Sat, 01 Jan 2022..Sat, 31 Dec 2022
today.on_weekday?
#=> true
today.next_occurring(:thursday)
#=> Thurs, 06 Oct 2022
```

...and `DateTime`:

```ruby
right_now = Time.zone.now
#=> Mon, 03 Oct 2022 08:30:23.666835000 UTC +00:00
right_now.beginning_of_day
#=> Mon, 03 Oct 2022 00:00:00.000000000 UTC +00:00
right_now.end_of_week
#=> Sun, 09 Oct 2022 23:59:59.999999999 UTC +00:00
right_now.beginning_of_month
#=> Sat, 01 Oct 2022 00:00:00.000000000 UTC +00:00
right_now.end_of_quarter
#=> Sat, 31 Dec 2022 23:59:59.999999999 UTC +00:00
right_now.beginning_of_year
#=> Sat, 01 Jan 2022 00:00:00.000000000 UTC +00:00
right_now.all_day
#=> Mon, 03 Oct 2022 00:00:00.000000000 UTC +00:00..Mon, 03 Oct 2022 23:59:59.999999999 UTC +00:00
today.all_week
#=> Mon, 03 Oct 2022 00:00:00.000000000 UTC +00:00..Sun, 09 Oct 2022 23:59:59.999999999 UTC +00:00
today.all_month
#=> Sat, 01 Oct 2022 00:00:00.000000000 UTC +00:00..Mon, 31 Oct 2022 23:59:59.999999999 UTC +00:00
right_now.all_year
#=> Sat, 01 Jan 2022 00:00:00.000000000 UTC +00:00..Sat, 31 Dec 2022 23:59:59.999999999 UTC +00:00
right_now.on_weekday?
#=> true

> right_now.next_occurring(:thursday)

Reviewer: Omg, lots I knew but lots I didn't!!

#=> Thurs, 06 Oct 2022 08:30:23.666835000 UTC +00:00
```

## Why?

> This is one of those cases where the ORM (and the tooling around it) get in the way and introduce unforseen performance issues.

Reviewer: Mmm, don't feel that the pain point that you're trying to convey here is clear!

The `.where` scope has an implicit `ORDER` scope on the primary key that isn't obvious at first glance.

```ruby
User.where(email: "andy@goodscary.com")
# SELECT "users".*
# FROM "users"
# WHERE "users"."email" = "andy@goodscary.com"

User.where(email: "andy@goodscary.com").first
# SELECT "users".*
# FROM "users"
# WHERE "users"."email" = "andy@goodscary.com"
# ORDER BY "users"."id" ASC
# LIMIT 1

User.find_by(email: "andy@goodscary.com")
# SELECT "users".*
# FROM "users"
# WHERE "users"."email" = "andy@goodscary.com"
# LIMIT 1
```

> Straightforward indexes on our database didn't help us as in our—more complex—case. We were querying using an index, but because we were using `.where().first` we were inadvertently doing a non-indexed scan to establish the order, which caused enormous performance problems.

Reviewer: Wait. I'm confused!

This feels like something from an earlier post???

---
title: "Time extensions are an unsung hero of Active Support"

> description: "There’s a method for that"

Author: ```suggestion
description: "Is the end of the quarter of Tuesday, a week from now, a Sunday? There’s a method for that."
```

layout: article
category: ruby
image:
  base: "2022/time-ranges-are-an-unsung-hero-of-active-support"
  alt: "Calendar with pins"
  credit: "Towfiqu barbhuiya"
  source: "https://unsplash.com/photos/bwOAixLG0uc"

---

In Active Support‘s extensions to the core Ruby classes, some of the most useful and plentiful are related to `Time`.

> One of Rails’s founding uses was to provide helpful, reusable methods for regularly performed tasks. In our web applications we‘re often using time periods.

Reviewer: using: manipulating/working with (different) time periods?

Reviewer: I feel like there's a better word than 'uses' after "Rails's founding"...

Author: ```suggestion
One of Rails’s founding uses was to provide helpful, reusable methods for regularly performed tasks. In our web applications we‘re often working with times and dates.
```

> Enter the methods from [DateAndTime::Calculations](https://github.com/rails/rails/blob/main/activesupport/lib/active_support/core_ext/date_and_time/calculations.rb). To find out more checkout out the [API documentation](http://api.rubyonrails.org/classes/DateAndTime/Calculations.html) or the [`DateTime` section in the Core Extensions Rails guide](http://guides.rubyonrails.org/active_support_core_extensions.html#extensions-to-datetime).

Reviewer: *check out

Author: ```suggestion
Enter the methods from [DateAndTime::Calculations](https://github.com/rails/rails/blob/main/activesupport/lib/active_support/core_ext/date_and_time/calculations.rb). To find out more check out out the [API documentation](http://api.rubyonrails.org/classes/DateAndTime/Calculations.html) or the [`DateTime` section in the Core Extensions Rails guide](http://guides.rubyonrails.org/active_support_core_extensions.html#extensions-to-datetime).
```

right_now = Time.zone.now
#=> Mon, 03 Oct 2022 08:30:23.666835000 UTC +00:00
right_now.beginning_of_day
#=> Mon, 03 Oct 2022 00:00:00.000000000 UTC +00:00
right_now.end_of_week
#=> Sun, 09 Oct 2022 23:59:59.999999999 UTC +00:00
right_now.beginning_of_month
#=> Sat, 01 Oct 2022 00:00:00.000000000 UTC +00:00
right_now.end_of_quarter
#=> Sat, 31 Dec 2022 23:59:59.999999999 UTC +00:00
right_now.beginning_of_year
#=> Sat, 01 Jan 2022 00:00:00.000000000 UTC +00:00
right_now.all_day
#=> Mon, 03 Oct 2022 00:00:00.000000000 UTC +00:00..Mon, 03 Oct 2022 23:59:59.999999999 UTC +00:00
today.all_week
#=> Mon, 03 Oct 2022 00:00:00.000000000 UTC +00:00..Sun, 09 Oct 2022 23:59:59.999999999 UTC +00:00
today.all_month
#=> Sat, 01 Oct 2022 00:00:00.000000000 UTC +00:00..Mon, 31 Oct 2022 23:59:59.999999999 UTC +00:00
right_now.all_year
#=> Sat, 01 Jan 2022 00:00:00.000000000 UTC +00:00..Sat, 31 Dec 2022 23:59:59.999999999 UTC +00:00
right_now.on_weekday?
#=> true
right_now.next_occurring(:thursday)
#=> Thurs, 06 Oct 2022 08:30:23.666835000 UTC +00:00
```

## Why?

These are tremendously useful, and well-named, methods to help describe the date and time logic in your applications.

## Why not?

> While this style of extending core Ruby classes is sometime derided by folks who dislike Rails’s ”magical” style... you’d be a bit silly to reimplment your own date calculations inside a Rails application.

Author: ```suggestion
While this style of extending core Ruby classes is sometime derided by folks who dislike Rails’s ”magical” style... you’d be a bit silly to reimplement your own date calculations inside a Rails application.
```

> While this style of extending core Ruby classes is sometime derided by folks who dislike Rails’s ”magical” style... you’d be a bit silly to reimplement your own date calculations inside a Rails application.

Reviewer: *sometimes

Author: ```suggestion
While this style of extending core Ruby classes is sometimes derided by folks who dislike Rails’s ”magical” style... you’d be a bit silly to reimplement your own date calculations inside a Rails application.
```
